#summary Consolidated list/overview of wiki pages.
#labels Featured,Phase-UserDocs,Topic-Project
The one-stop v8-juice/v8-convert Table of Contents...

<wiki:toc/>


==v8-convert==

v8-convert is a mid-2011 spinoff of v8-juice, providing a streamlined, header-only library which focuses solely on type conversions.

  * [V8Convert Introduction/overview] of v8-convert's features.
  * [ChangeLog Summary of changes]
  * [Contributing] to v8-juice and v8-convert.
  * How to [V8Convert_FunctionBinding bind native function/methods] to JS.
    * How to [V8Convert_Overloading overload function and constructor bindings].
  * How to [V8Convert_PropertyBinding bind native non-function variables] to JS.
  * An [V8Convert_XTo alternative interface] for function and property bindings.
  * Various [V8Convert_TipsAndTricks Tips, tricks, and how-tos].
  * Addons/plugins/demos:
    * Yet another [V8Convert_ClassCreator class-binding mechanism]
    * [V8Convert_ByteArray ByteArray class]
    * [V8Convert_Shell V8Shell] simplifies bootstrapping of v8 in an application.
    * [V8Convert_Socket Posix-like socket API]
    * [JSPDO JSPDO database access] abstraction layer
      * [JSPDO_API]
      * [JSPDO_HowTo]

==v8-juice==

v8-juice is the "main project". It has been online since early 2009 and has accumulated quite a bit of code and wiki pages...

  * [HomePage Home page]
  * [BuildingTheCode Build and installing]
  * [ChangeLog Summary of changes]
  * [Contributing] to v8-juice and v8-convert
  * [BindingFunctions Binding native functions]
  * Binding native classes:
    * [CreatingJSClasses Intro to binding classes] using v8-juice.
    * [ClassBinder] - the libirary's first generation of class binding API.
      * [ClassBinderPartTwo]
    * [ClassWrap] - 2nd-generation wrapper.
      * [ClassWrapPolicies ClassWrap policies]
  * [ThreadingInJS Basic multi-threading] in JS scripts.
  * [Plugins]:
    * [PathFinderClass]
    * [PluginCurl Curl]
    * [PluginExpatParser XML parser]
    * [PluginNCurses ncurses]
    * [PluginPosixFILE File class]
    * [PluginPosixPoll poll()]
    * [PluginReadline readline]
    * [PluginSprintf sprintf()]
    * [PluginSQLite3 sqlite3]
    * [PluginWhefs whefs] (embedded filesystem)
    * [PluginWhio whio] (i/o library)
  * [WhereToFindMoreDocs]